Narrative Theory for Computational Narrative Understanding
Andrew Piper
Richard Jean So
Department of Languages, Literatures, and Cultures
Department of English
McGill University
McGill University
andrew.piper@mcgill.ca
richard.so@mcgill.ca
David Bamman
School of Information
UC Berkeley
dbamman@berkeley.edu

Abstract

cultural functions, the NLP community has drawn
on a wide range of theoretical perspectives on narraOver the past decade, the field of natural lantive (both implicit and explicit), without the benefit
guage processing has developed a wide array
of situating those perspectives within a broader orof computational methods for reasoning about
ganizing theoretical structure. Such an organizing
narrative, including summarization, commonstructure can encourage terminological consistency
sense inference, and event detection. While
and methodological clarity in terms of research
this work has brought an important empirical lens for examining narrative, it is by and
goals, while also illuminating the points of contact
large divorced from the large body of theobetween seemingly unrelated research agendas.
retical work on narrative within the humaniThis position paper seeks to provide the beginties, social and cognitive sciences. In this posinings of such a unifying framework for the compution paper, we introduce the dominant theoretitational study of narrative. Drawing on the multiple
cal frameworks to the NLP community, situate
expertises of literary and textual studies on the one
current research in NLP within distinct narratohand and natural language processing on the other,
logical traditions, and argue that linking computational work in NLP to theory opens up a
our aim is to provide an overview of the different
range of new empirical questions that would
theoretical components of narrative study and highboth help advance our understanding of narralight promising NLP research in those domains.
tive and open up new practical applications.
By providing the NLP community with a richer
and more coherent theoretical foundation for im1 Introduction
plementing computational solutions for narrative
understanding, our goal is to bring together otherResearch in NLP has seen an increasing attention
to narrative understanding over the past decade. wise disconnected lines of inquiry as well as reduce
competing conceptual frameworks that can inhibit
Indeed, the NLP community is not alone. From
studies in economics (Shiller, 2020) to climate sci- progress. In doing so, the field will be better positioned to address the major research challenges
ence (Bushell et al., 2017) to political polarization
(Kubin et al., 2021) to mental health (Adler et al., that we describe in the closing section.
2016), there is a growing consensus that narrative
In what follows we organize our paper in the
is a key concept for understanding human behav- following way: first, we provide a general definiior and beliefs. Narrative is a core mechanism
tion of narrativity, integrating existing theoretical
through which human beings come to understand
frameworks; second, we review the fundamental
their world, find meaning, motivate their actions
components of narrative understanding and the reand those of others, and create communities. As
search opportunities within each domain; third and
narratologists often highlight, narrative is a univer- finally, we identify a few salient higher-level probsal practice among all human cultures across all
lems of narrative understanding for the NLP comtime periods (Barthes and Duisit, 1975).
munity to address as they relate to questions of
In developing computational methods to under- social change, creative industries, and social and
stand narrative and its various social, personal, and
mental well-being.
298
Proceedings of the 2021 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 298–311
November 7–11, 2021. c 2021 Association for Computational Linguistics

2

The elements of narrativity

2.1

Towards a working definition of
narrativity

Interestingly, there is no consensus when it comes
to a minimal definition of whether a sequence of
tokens can be classified as narrative. Many recent
theories, however, do tend to converge around notions of time and process (Ricoeur, 2014; Herman,
2009; Walsh, 2018; Sternberg, 1992). As Herman
(2009) writes, “Narrative roots itself in the lived,
felt experience of human or human-like agents interacting in an ongoing way with their surrounding
environment . . . Narrative, in other words, is a basic human strategy for coming to terms with time,
process, and change” (21).
Such definitions are consistent with a large body
of Aristotelian-inspired narrative theory that emphasizes “change of state” as an essential component of narrative (Liveley, 2019). Narrative
is defined by sequences that represent a transformational experience or an expression of “disequilibrium” (Bruner, 1991). These include Freytag (1895)’s pyramid, Van Dijk (1976)’s “ProblemAttempt-Outcome” model, and Sternberg (1992)’s
model of “Suspense-Curiosity-Surprise.”
Common to all of these definitions is an attention
to “story-level” phenomena (also called diegesis),
i.e., the structure of events that unfold in a narrative.
Genette (1983) is the work best known for introducing an emphasis on the perspectival nature of
narrative, i.e., that narratives must have narrators.
Narratives not only encode time, but also point of
view in the ordering of information. In what has
come to be known as the classical model (Fig. 1),
Genette introduces three primary relational terms:
story refers to the events recounted, discourse to the
order and economy of their telling, and narrating
to the narrator’s role in shaping this information.1
Genette then introduced three further terms to
capture the relationship between these dimensions,
tense, mood, and voice. Genette extrapolates from
the linguistic meanings of these terms to capture
specific narratological features. These include aspects of time and the ordering of events (tense); the
relationship between eventfulness and description
(mood); and aspects related to perspective, such as
point of view, dialogue, and focalization (voice).
The post-classical intervention in narratology,
often dated to the 1990s, emphasized that “narra-

narrating

voice

mood

story

tense

discourse

Figure 1: Genette (1983)’s narrative triangle.

tivization is at once a textual property and a cognitive process” (Liveley, 2019). The key concept
introduced here is that of “situatedness,” i.e., narrative representation is “situated in—must be interpreted in light of—a specific discourse context
or occasion for telling” (Herman, 2009). Situatedness foregrounds the role that audiences and
context play in shaping narrativity and can refer
to a variety of social contexts, including medium
(oral, visual, textual), platform (Facebook, Twitter,
Reddit), community type, and cognitive processes
(Herman, 2009). Understanding the situatedness of
narratives also opens the door to understanding the
interactional nature of storytelling introduced by
Georgakopoulou (2007)’s theory of “small stories,”
where narratives are not standalone objects but can
occur through time, such as Facebook status updates (Page, 2010).
Thus we could model narrative theory as engaging with two levels of interactions (Fig. 2), where
classical theory focuses on interactions between different narrative features and postclassical theory on
audience interactions with feature level interactions.
It is this interactional understanding of narrative
that has led post-classical narratologists to speak
of “degrees of narrativity” (Giora and Shen, 1994;
Herman, 2009; Pianzola, 2018). Rather than think
of narrative as a binary class, “narrativity” represents a scalar construct that captures the dynamic
interactions among narrative features and narrative
situations (Pianzola, 2018).
Given this framework, it remains necessary to
explicate the elementary features that these higher
level interactions might consist of and how we can
observe them. Accordingly, we propose the following minimal model of narrativity, which highlights
the elements that must be present in order for a
1
symbolic sequence to aspire to narrativity. While
Story and discourse are English-language translations of
the earlier Russian formalist terms fabula and syuzhet.
we do not expect all variables will be explicit in any
299

audience

⇳

narrative features

}
}

postclassical

classical

Figure 2: Levels of narrative analysis.

rientiality . . . reflects a cognitive schema of embodiedness that relates to human existence and human
concerns. . . . In my model there can be narratives
without plot, but there cannot be any narratives
without a human (anthropomorphic) experiencer
of some sort” (9). The nature and distribution of
agents thus marks an essential element of computational narrative study. Within NLP, agents have
been centered both in their detection and in predicting the relations between them.

Agent detection. While not always framed this
way, agent detection can thus be seen as a foundational aspect of computational narratology. In
order to better understand the role of agents within
narratives, we need reliable systems to extract and
identify them. Work in agent-focused NLP has
emphasized expanding our understanding of characters beyond named entities, as in agents such
as “the coachman” or “the frog,” through the conA
Someone
cept of animacy detection (Vala et al., 2015; Jahan
B
tells
et al., 2018; Coll Ardanuy et al., 2020; Karsdorp
C
someone
et al., 2015), while also differentiating characters
D somewhere that
from other named referents (Jahan and Finlayson,
E
someone
2019). Other work has utilized annotated data to
F did something(s)
improve NER performance in the literary domain
G
[to someone]
(Bamman
et al., 2019), making sizable differences
H
somewhere
in the accuracy of detecting such entities.
I
at some time
The ability to recognize agents with increasJ for some reason
ing accuracy opens up a number of research quesThus what defines the presence of narrativity are
tions on their role within narratives that aligns with
the eight features: A. teller, B. mode of telling, C. longstanding theoretical frameworks. For examrecipient, D. situation, E. agent, F. one or more
ple, Propp (2010) theorized that character is desequential actions, G. potential object, H. spatial
fined as a limited set of narrative “functions,” while
location, I. temporal specification, J. rationale.
Forster (1985) introduced the distinction between
In what follows, we organize our sections accord- round/flat characters with respect to their emotional
ing to these features, drawing attention to their fur- depth. More recent work has focused on representher elaboration through existing theoretical frame- tations of gender (Cheng, 2020; Kraicer and Piper,
2019; Underwood et al., 2018; Piper, 2018a), reliworks and ongoing NLP work in each area. We
gion (Terman, 2017), psychology (Rashkin et al.,
close by exploring how better understanding their
2018; Brahman and Chaturvedi, 2020), desire fulinteractions can lead to further insights into major
fillment (Chaturvedi et al., 2016a) and power (Sap
questions related to narrative understanding.
et al., 2017) with respect to narrative agents.
2.2 Agents (E, G)
This work is driven both by the ability to recWhere classical narratology invests more heavily
ognize agents within text and ascribe attributes to
in the perspectival nature of narrative—the act of
them. While the former has seen progress in NLP,
telling—post-classical models have re-ignited a
character attribute inference is an open research
focus on the centrality of characters or “agents” area that requires more attention: how do we best
(Frow, 2014; Jannidis, 2009; Eder et al., 2010; theorize attributes like gender, ethnicity, religion,
Palmer, 2004), first explored by Propp (2010). For
emotion, function and power in agents within narraexample, Fludernik (2002) argues that a concept of
tive texts, and build models for their estimation that
“experientiality” is definitive for narrativity: “Expe- respect the biases present in the data (and not those
300
given sequence, they are all implicitly necessary
for narrativity to occur. Following the “degrees
of narrativity” hypothesis, we expect that recipients’ response to narrativity would increase as the
explicitation of these variables increases.
According to our minimal definition, narrativity
can occur when:

external to it)? Better attribute inference can facilitate research to identify what Blodgett et al. (2020)
call “harms of representation,” i.e., how different
communities are underrepresented or stereotypically portrayed, which has a strong connection to
theories of personal dignity (Honneth, 1996).
Relation detection. A second important tradition for understanding narrative agents is related
to the field of social network theory. Character
“schemas” have played an important role in narrative understanding, including Propp (2010)’s functions, protagonist/antagonist relations derived from
classical tragedy (Moretti, 2013), Girard (2020)’s
theory of mimetic desire, and Woloch (2009)’s distinction between major and minor characters.

2.3

Events (F)

As can be seen from the definition of narrativity
in §2.1, agent-based actions form the core of the
diegetic universe of a narrative (i.e., what happened). We can differentiate between two classes
of problems this raises: understanding the ordering
of events (and any discrepancies between story and
discourse) and classifying events into more general
functional units within a narrative.

Narrative sequence. Narrative discourse is comprised first and foremost of a sequence of events
that are selected and ordered by a narrator. This
order may correspond more or less closely and with
more or less selectivity with the underlying events
of the story. That is to say, given a more or less
infinite set of possible events to report about the
This work depends on the accurate extraction not
world, a narrator will choose a selection of events
simply of a narrative’s agents, but of the relations
to report and order those events more or less sebetween them. How do we know that two char- quentially with their occurrence in the storyworld.
acters are “connected” or “interacting”? Within
While much work in NLP has focused on the
NLP, this structure has been inferred through a va- core problem of event detection (Nguyen and Grriety of methods (see Labatut and Bost (2019) for
ishman, 2015; Chen et al., 2015; Nguyen et al.,
an overview), including the use of explicit quota- 2016; Feng et al., 2016; Ahn, 2006; Li et al., 2013;
tions (Elson et al., 2010), though there remains a
Yang and Mitchell, 2016)—including event detecgreat deal of ambiguity in inferring the connections
tion within literature (Sims et al., 2019)—a range
between characters (in scenarios such as thinking
of work has also considered assembling sequences
about, looking at, passing by, etc.). More recent
of events into stereotypical frames, modeling the
work has examined the characterization of such re- linear order of events (along with their participants)
lationships, both in supervised models that presume
into narrative event chains (Chambers and Jurafsky,
a fixed set of relations, such as positive/negative
2008, 2009) probabilistic frames (Cheung et al.,
(Chaturvedi et al., 2016b) and familial/professional
2013) and schemas (Chambers, 2013).
(Makazhanov et al., 2014; Massey et al., 2015), and
In applying the construct of “scripts” (Schank
in unsupervised models that learn a set of descrip- and Abelson, 1977)—the experiential relatedness
tors (Iyyer et al., 2016).
of event sequences in discourse—this work allows,
While work in NLP has focused on the task of
first, for an improved understanding of eventfulrelation detection, a great deal of work remains to
ness (Hühn, 2014), i.e., the ratio of events relaallow such methods to be usable in practice. One
tive to the amount of description and/or expected
of the most challenging yet potentially transforma- events (for which Plato used the terms diegesis
tive goals is character relationship prediction for
(events) and mimesis (description)), allowing for
family relations. Identifying which character pairs
better estimates of narrative categories like “pacare siblings or parents/children is very difficult in
ing” and “suspense” (Sternberg, 1992; Doust and
practice, where such information is often expressed
Piwek, 2017; Wilmot and Keller, 2020). Additionthrough a single statement or is altogether left to be
ally, knowledge of event sequences can be used to
inferred. The ability to estimate familial structures
better understand the temporal relations between
in narrative would enable a host of research ques- events (which we discuss in the next section), as
tions related to this fundamental human social unit, well as the logical relations between events with
such as: How have family relations changed over
respect to questions of causality (Mostafazadeh
time, especially with respect to questions of size, et al., 2016). Causal reasoning has been identihierarchy, and conflict? How has the agency of
fied as one of the primary functions of narrative
children evolved, either in imaginative depictions
(Todorov, 1981; Graesser et al., 2002), and thus
or within clinical and/or judicial settings?
better modeling causal relations in stories can help
301

researchers understand the representation of human
reasoning within them.

proximated as “sentiment valence” (Jockers, 2015;
Reagan et al., 2016; Boyd et al., 2020). Considerably more work needs to be done to understand the
formal and cognitive conditions of such narrative
pivots.
Also important to emphasize here is that no single approach is universally appropriate to understanding narrative structure. Much future work
remains in exploring further ways of modeling narrative types and validating existing models more
thoroughly. We take up the relevance of this issue
more fully in §3.1.

Narrative structure. The ability to resolve narrative events into higher-level abstractions represents another important area of research for narrative understanding, which we group into passageand document-level problems.
Passage-level challenges in narrative structure
include the identification of narrative levels (Reiter et al., 2019), where narratives include other
narratives within them (cf. 1001 Nights as a classic example) and have complex interactions with
point of view (described in §2.6 below). A re- 2.4 Temporality (I)
lated problem is narrative scene detection, which
attempts to observe the spatial, temporal, and agen- Narrative theory organizes the category of time
at its most general level according to the binary
tial boundaries between story segments. While
“text worlds” (Mikhalkova et al., 2020) and “nar- scheme of “narrative time” versus “narrated time,”
where the latter refers to the amount of time passing
remes” (Delmonte and Marchesini, 2017) have
within the story and the former refers to the amount
been proposed as alternate terms, we recommend
of time passing within discourse. One can tell a
the use of scenes to differentiate such horizontally
structured boundary-detection issues from the ver- “short-lived” story over hundreds of pages (e.g.,
tical ones of narrative levels as well as the higher- James Joyce’s Ulysses) or a “long-lived” story in
level problem of narrative plotline detection, i.e., just a few lines (e.g., Biblical stories of human generations). Thus the first level of temporal analysis
the act of assembling scenes and levels into more
for narrative must aim to understand the relationgeneral narrative units defined by agents who may
range over both time and space (Wallace, 2012). ship between the “time-of-telling” (narrative time)
and the “time-of-what-is-told” (narrated time).
Doing so, we arrive at the following hierarchical
Underwood (2018) provides an empirical apscheme: event-scene-level-plotline-plot.
proach
to this concept, annotating the temporal duAt the document level, work in NLP has relied
ration (narrated time) of passages of 250 words (i.e.,
on a number of different theoretical frameworks for
within
a fixed window of discourse). While comcategorizing narrative segments into higher-level
putational work on elapsed narrated time predictypes. Ouyang and McKeown (2014), Swanson
tion has begun (Yauney et al., 2019), much work
et al. (2014), Levi et al. (2020) and Saldias and
remains to be done. This work has the potential not
Roy (2020) all leverage the categorization outlined
by Labov and Waletzky (1967), focusing espe- only to open up new empirical studies into pacing
and suspense detection (Doust and Piwek, 2017),
cially on the “most reportable event (MRE)” as
which
theorists assume is an important dimension
an indicator of a narrative’s more general meaning.
While valuable for the analysis of “small stories” in audience response to narrative (Sternberg, 1992).
(Georgakopoulou, 2007), MRE is a limited con- It can also provide insights into changing historical
struct for addressing longer, more complex narra- dispositions to narrative temporality to better understand large-scale questions of cultural evolution.
tives. Instead a preferred focus should attempt to
explore the theoretical literature’s focus on “disA second level of temporal analysis focuses on
equilibrium” and “change of state” (Bruner, 1991; questions of “anachrony,” the misalignment of disHerman, 2009). Papalampidi et al. (2019) opera- course sequence from story sequence (i.e., analeptionalizes the concept of “turning point” identifi- sis and prolepsis or flashback and flashforward).
cation based on how-to guides for screenwriters
Genette (1983) again provides a theoretical scaf(Hauge, 2017), Piper (2015) uses a similar con- folding for this work, enumerating a range of finestruct for novels based on models of religious con- grained categories of anachrony, and providing exversion, and a number of studies implement Kurt
amples of scene-level annotations for such works
Vonnegut’s theory of the plot arc as the narrative
as Homer’s Iliad (for which the classical trope of
discourse of rising and falling “fortune,” often ap- beginning in medias res necessitates flashbacks)
302

and Proust’s In Search of Lost Time.
Within NLP, this line of research is takenup most extensively in research related to the
TempEval task (Verhagen et al., 2009; UzZaman
et al., 2013), which orders events in text relative
to each other, but typically operates on documents
with relatively short time scales (not novels spanning decades). Much work on temporal ordering
for long documents is required, including alternative problem definitions (such as work by Kim
et al. (2020) on predicting the absolute time of day
for each sentence in novels, or Kearns (2020) on
labeling time disruptions).
Accurately estimating the relative temporal ordering for events, sentences and scenes in narratives has the potential to shed insight on a range
of narrative questions: temporal ordering is a precondition for representations of plot; it is a requirement for any kind of causal understanding
(Mostafazadeh et al., 2016); and even holistic markers such as the rate of analepsis (nostalgia) can be
an indicator of cultural prestige (Piper and Portelance, 2016) or potentially mental dispositions of
patients or political communities.
2.5

Setting (H)

literature was much less focused on New England
in its origins than theorists have claimed and continues to be much more nationally centered than,
for example, UK literature, confirming European
assumptions about the provincialism of U.S. literature. Erlin et al. (2021) show how minor European literatures are subject to different stylistic
pressures with respect to national setting than major languages, contradicting earlier theories.
Existing work has thus already leveraged measurements of named locations to make important
theoretical advances (attesting to the value of this
dimension of narrative), but there remains a range
of work that can only be realized by more complex measurements of the structure of places in
text. In this view, literary theorists have emphasized the important distinction between “space”
and “place” when it comes to setting, where the
latter refers to concrete geo-locations or physical
settings and the former to experiential constructs
(Lefebvre and Nicholson-Smith, 1991; Piatti and
Hurni, 2009). Understanding narrative “space”
refers to relational constructs (i.e., events are dispersed or concentrated around single/many points)
as well as questions of navigability and intelligibility (as in Kafka’s labyrinthine bureaucratic or
governmental spaces (Piatti et al., 2013)). Similar
to the logical relations between narrative sentences
(temporal or causal), narratives also encode a spatial logic that can be more or less explicit.

The setting of a narrative defines where the action
takes place—the physical universe where the plot
unfolds, which may be grounded by referents in the
real world (e.g., New York City in Truman Capote’s
Breakfast at Tiffany’s) or entirely fictional (HogWe can ground this theoretical perspective in a
warts Academy in Rowland’s Harry Potter). In the
number of concrete computational tasks. As noted
same way that we understand an agent through the
above, inferring plotlines (and plot more generally)
actions they perform, theoretical work also points
requires grounding actions in the places where they
out a similar co-determinative relationship between
unfold (so that one plotline in Lord of the Rings is
action and setting (Burke, 1969): the setting (such
the journey by Frodo and Sam from The Shire to
as a kitchen) influences the kinds of activities that
Mount Doom). While NER provides the capacity
are performed there (acts of cooking, eating), and
to identify mentions of places, one open challenge
we understand that setting through those actions.
is resolving different mentions of the same place
Modeling setting naturally requires the identifi- to the same physical entity. While this is relatively
cation of place, and much work in NLP has focused
simple for named locations such as Mount Doom,
on the core tasks of entity recognition and toponym
coreference resolution systems struggle with longresolution in the context of narrative (DeLozier
document coreference of common entities like the
et al., 2016; Brooke et al., 2016; Bamman et al., house and the room (Bamman et al., 2020; Toshni2019), leading to models that are able to recognize
wal et al., 2020), which define the center of the narboth named locations, facilities and geopolitical
rative universe for many fictional constructs. Likeentities (New York, Hogwarts) as well as common
wise, many questions can only be answered by meaones (the kitchen, the village).
suring the relationship between places mentioned
The existence of such tools has already estab- in text: how far do Frodo and Sam walk on their
lished setting as a main area of focus within cul- journey? Cultural historians have long argued for
tural analytics. Wilkens (2013) has shown how U.S. an association between mobility and agency (Sen,
303

1993). Systems that allow better inference on questions of spatial movement within narratives could
provide important insights into changing power dynamics with respect to different social communities
(e.g. how far are women and children allowed to
go, either in personal life stories, real-world news
accounts, or fictional mythologies?).
2.6

Perspective (A, B, C)

We have so far focused on narrative elements that
fall below our double line in §2.1, i.e., that concern
the diegetic universe of a narrative. In this section, we look more closely at the elements that fall
above our double line, which aligns with Genette’s
concept of narrating.
At its most general level, narrating refers to the
perspective from which a story is told, “the generating instance of narrative discourse” (Genette,
1983, 213). It thus captures an intending consciousness (whether real or imagined) as the source of
language variation in a narrative. This gives rise to
a number of different research directions, including
point of view, focalization and dialogue.
Point of view. The simplest form of narrative
perspective pertains to the relationship between the
narrator and the story, i.e., whether the narrator is
an agent external to or present within the diegetic
universe of the narrative. We refer to this using Bal
and Van Boheemen (2009)’s distinction between
external narrators (EN) and character-bound narrators (CN), colloquially understood as first- and
third-person narratives. Computational models of
point of view have found strong differentiators in
simple features like the use of personal pronouns
(Eisenberg and Finlayson, 2016), and have focused
on identifying extradiegetic moments in personal
narratives using subjectivity as a guide (Sagae et al.,
2013). Genette (1983, 248) posits a more complex
set of relations between layers of narrative involvement by narrating agents that is worth further study.

term narratologists use to denote text spans where
a reader cannot reliably distinguish between two
distinct perspectives. While some computational
efforts have attempted to identify free indirect discourse (Brunner et al., 2020; Long and So, 2016),
it remains an extremely challenging recognition
task. One way to frame the task of focalization
detection is as a subset of agent attribute detection.
Dialogue. The final elementary aspect of perspective, dialogue, represents an explicit attribution
of “point of view” to a particular agent within the
narrative (including indirect discourse). Dialogue
attribution is a well-studied, yet still challenging
problem within NLP (He et al., 2013; Muzny et al.,
2017b). While computational work has examined
the ways in which dialogue differs from narrative
(Muzny et al., 2017a) as well as functions as a
main predictor of fictional versus non-fictional storytelling (Piper, 2018b), less attended to are the
ways in which dialogue can provide insights into
agent-specific sub-narratives. Agents are often depicted as having different voices that can be distinguished empirically (Vishnubhotla et al., 2019); in
the same way that all narratives represent a particular point of view, dialogue can reveal intra-narrative
perspectives and biases. Reconstructing the degree
of partiality of any given agent’s perspective within
the larger narrative in which they are embedded
represents an important line of future research into
narrative perspective—one which requires not only
high-quality models for speaker attribution, but
also models for inferring speakers’ attitudes on
the narrated world expressed through dialogue.

3

Scaling up narrative understanding

Our aim so far is to align existing work in NLP narrative understanding with theoretical frameworks in
narratology. In this final section, we want to identify three core challenge areas that tackle larger
questions regarding the social impact of narrative
and that depend upon the successful integration of
the different strands of NLP research outlined here.
Broadly, each of these areas attempts to understand
narrative as an important basis for human behavior.

Focalization. The second level called “focalization” refers to the organization of narrative language around an experiencing agent’s consciousness within the narrative that is separate from the
primary narrator. This occurs when we see events
3.1 Narrative economies
explicitly refracted through the eyes, mind, and
feelings of a particular agent or character. Un- One of the core beliefs in narratology is that narraderstanding the boundaries between the narrator’s
tives are deeply informed by prior narrative struc“voice” and that of a character’s perspective is a
tures (Genette, 1997) and social context (Herman,
challenging interpretive task for human readers as
2009). In order to better understand how narratives
well as machines. “Free indirect discourse” is the
influence each other or are influenced by different
304

social contexts, we first need more robust systems
for classifying different narrative types.
Fields as diverse as folkloristics and narrative
psychology provide potential models of how to
move forward. Two of the best known examples
of manually constructed classification systems for
fictional narratives are Thompson’s Motif-Index of
Folk-literature (Thompson, 1989) and the AarneThompson-Uther (ATU) Tale Index. In the field of
narrative psychology, Adler et al. (2016) have provided a taxonomy of life narratives that correlate
with life satisfaction surveys. While these models
have seen only limited computational implementation (Broadwell et al., 2018), both offer examples
of models for future narrative classification.
The inter-disciplinary computational implementation of such large-scale registers of story types
represents a major research challenge. If successful,
it would provide invaluable insights into questions
of cultural evolution, narrative influence, mental
health, and transnational cultural transfer. For example, how do real-world events like wars and
pandemics modulate how humans invent or tell stories? When do we see new narrative forms emerging due to different historical or personal contexts?
How do information economies like social media
modulate the production of narrative structures circulating in the news in real time (as with events
like Black Lives Matter)? And what can narrative
understanding do to further combat problematic
conspiracy theories or misinformation campaigns?
These are just a few of the large-scale questions
that researchers will be able to address as our understanding of the nature of narrative types and their
interactions improves.

features—will allow researchers to develop a more
multi-dimensional understanding of narrative response beyond simple binaries like fact-based versus narrative discourse. Doing so will allow research to address the kinds of narratives that readers, viewers and listeners respond most strongly to
and better understand the textual features that drive
responses. Given the proliferation of user generated online responses “in the wild” today, a rich
research opportunity awaits to move beyond laboratory environments (Bail, 2014; Salganik, 2019)
to understand the relationship between different
narrative products (movies, books, advertisements)
and consumer responses captured by social media.
3.3

Narrative beliefs

Common to the work discussed so far is a reliance
on two guiding assumptions: that narrativity is both
explicit (encoded within given textual features) and
discrete (bounded by a single document or series
of documents). Yet, as research in narrative psychology has long argued, narrative can also be conceived as a latent organizing principle of human
reasoning (Bruner, 1991).
Sociologists refer to the notion of “ontological narratives” (Somers, 1994) or “deep stories”
(Hochschild, 2018) to refer to the narrative structuring of information that individuals use to understand their place in the world and facilitate decisionmaking. Such deep stories are not located exclusively or even explicitly within a single narrative
instance; rather, they can be thought of as higherorder organizing principles that situate multiple
events of speech into a more general paradigm. One
powerful example of this is the so-called “Great Replacement” narrative, the worldview held by some
3.2 Narrative responses
white Americans or Europeans that non-white immigrants are arriving to take their jobs and political
Considerable work exists to study the efficacy of
power (Feola, 2020). While this belief takes many
narrative discourse when it comes to persuasion
(Dal Cin et al., 2004; Braddock and Dillard, 2016) different forms, it can be distilled into a single and
relatively cogent story.
and building trust (Kubin et al., 2021). Political
scientists and media studies scholars in particular
A greater understanding of these deep stories
have focused on the concept of “framing” to ana- and how they shape communities or political belyze how the news media shapes public attention
havior can have significant social outcomes. They
and policy debates by deciding what aspects of an
can help policymakers craft policies that better reissue to emphasize or exclude in reporting events
flect community belief systems and thus produce
(Boydstun, 2013; Card et al., 2015, 2016; Field
higher levels of adherence and support as well as
et al., 2018).
contribute to efforts at mitigating social crises. For
A more sophisticated computational modeling
example, Shiller (2020) argues that the severity
of narrative types—one that relies on an under- of economic downturns might in part rest on the
standing of the interactions of different narrative
vividness of certain stories circulating in society,
305

and thus, one effective strategy in containing this
severity might consist in promoting alternative narratives to the public. Researchers are increasingly
aware that changing human behavior depends on
changing the stories people tell themselves and
their social circles.

4

Conclusion

Narrative is a pervasive phenomenon that cuts
across the human experience. As research in NLP
has increasingly focused on developing computational models to reason about stories, we see space
for existing structures in narrative theory to help
provide an organizing system around these efforts.
By making connections between theoretical frameworks in narratology and existing research in NLP
more explicit, we hope to provide a mechanism
to coordinate diverse research efforts, unify terminology and methods, and suggest major research
challenges that will help drive the empirical study
of narrative forward.

5

Acknowledgments

We thank the anonymous reviewers for their helpful
comments. The research reported in this article
was supported by funding from the Social Sciences
and Humanities Research Council of Canada (8952013-1011), the National Science Foundation (IIS1942591), and the National Endowment for the
Humanities (HAA-271654-20).

References

David Bamman, Olivia Lewke, and Anya Mansoor.
2020. An annotated dataset of coreference in English literature. In Proceedings of the 12th Language Resources and Evaluation Conference, pages
44–54, Marseille, France. European Language Resources Association.
David Bamman, Sejal Popat, and Sheng Shen. 2019.
An annotated dataset of literary entities. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North American
Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, Volume 1
(Long and Short Papers), pages 2138–2144, Minneapolis, Minnesota. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Roland Barthes and Lionel Duisit. 1975. An introduction to the structural analysis of narrative. New literary history, 6(2):237–272.
Su Lin Blodgett, Solon Barocas, Hal Daumé III, and
Hanna Wallach. 2020. Language (technology) is
power: A critical survey of “bias” in NLP. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 5454–
5476, Online. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Ryan L Boyd, Kate G Blackburn, and James W Pennebaker. 2020. The narrative arc: Revealing core
narrative structures through text analysis. Science
advances, 6(32):eaba2196.
Amber E. Boydstun. 2013. Making the News: Politics, the Media, and Agenda Setting. University of
Chicago Press.
Kurt Braddock and James Price Dillard. 2016. Metaanalytic evidence for the persuasive effect of narratives on beliefs, attitudes, intentions, and behaviors.
Communication Monographs, 83(4):446–467.
Faeze Brahman and Snigdha Chaturvedi. 2020. Modeling protagonist emotions for emotion-aware storytelling. In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), pages 5277–5294, Online. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Jonathan M Adler, Jennifer Lodi-Smith, Frederick L
Philippe, and Iliane Houle. 2016. The incremental
validity of narrative identity in predicting well-being:
A review of the field and recommendations for the
future. Personality and Social Psychology Review,
20(2):142–175.
David Ahn. 2006. The stages of event extraction. In
Proceedings of the Workshop on Annotating and
Reasoning About Time and Events, ARTE ’06, pages
1–8, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Christopher A Bail. 2014. The cultural environment:
Measuring culture with big data. Theory and Society, 43(3-4):465–482.
Mieke Bal and Christine Van Boheemen. 2009. Narratology: Introduction to the theory of narrative. University of Toronto Press.

Peter Broadwell, David Mimno, and Timothy Tangherlini. 2018. The tell-tale hat: Surfacing the uncertainty in folklore classification. Journal of Cultural
Analytics.
Julian Brooke, Adam Hammond, and Timothy Baldwin. 2016. Bootstrapped text-level named entity
recognition for literature. In Proceedings of the
54th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 2: Short Papers), pages
344–350, Berlin, Germany. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Jerome Bruner. 1991. The narrative construction of reality. Critical inquiry, 18(1):1–21.

306

